The Top 3 Macronutrients Found in Soil: The NPK Ratio and CEC
NPK Ratio
NPK ratio refers to the three nutrients: nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), and potassium (K). NPK labels on fertilizer bags show a ratio to inform the user how much of each nutrient exists in the bag. The NPK ratio 10-10-10 stands for the weight in pounds of each nutrient. A 60-pound 10-10-10 bag would be ten pounds each of nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium, with the remaining thirty pounds being filler. Main functions of nitrogen and potassium are that they are elements of nucleic acids & proteins, which are important components of plant tissue. Phosphorus has importance in the regulation of processes in the plant, such as enzyme activities and osmosis. Let us delve deeper into these macronutrients.
Nitrogen
Nitrogen is related to photosynthesis and chlorophyll and oversees plant growth.  A lack of nitrogen can lead to slow growth, short rhizomes, and yellowish stunted leaves. Nitrogen is vital to the building of protein and enzymes. Nitrogen is the leading electrolyte found in soil. This means that nitrogen in soil boosts electrical conductivity. Electric conductivity from electrolytes corresponds to nutrient availability. The nitrogen element absorbs into Ammonium (NH4+) and Nitrate (NO3-) ions. Nitrogen is the one macronutrient not directly available from earth’s crust and atmosphere. Nitrogen intervenes in cell division and in other processes like the production of chlorophyll. It is a basic part of amino acids, proteins, and enzymes. In addition, it plays a key role in the production of starches, sugars, and lipids for nutrition and other basic plant processes
Phosphorus
Phosphorus is a vital part of DNA and RNA, which reads the DNA genetic code to build proteins and other compounds essential for seed yield, genetic transfer, and plant structure. DNA and RNA link together by phosphorus bonds. Phosphorus is vital element of ATP which is considered the energy unit of plants. ATP stands for Adenosine Triphosphate and is the molecule responsible for transporting energy to cells. Responsible for crop maturity at the right time. Plants that lack phosphorus take longer to mature and result in poor yields. A vital part in converting the sun’s energy into oil, food, and fiber. Phosphorus plays a key role in several ways such as for photosynthesis, storing energy, genetics, cell division, and cell enlargement. Also promotes healthy root and shoot growth. Proper phosphorus levels lead to improved crop quality, higher yields, and earlier crop maturity.
Potassium (Potash)
Essential to water retention. Balanced water saturation leads to disease-resistant hardy and healthy plants. Necessary plant nutrient that has a role in a wide range of physiological processes, such as enzyme activation and stomata regulation from regulation. Potassium is held in the soil by the cation exchange capacity. Cations are ions created when metal loses one or more electrons and retains protons, becoming more positive than negatively charged. More on the cation exchange capacity later. The letter K used to abbreviate Potassium originates from the German word “kalium.” Functions of potash are related to physiological conditions. These functions are diverse, including efficient water & nitrogen use, resistance to frost, pests, diseases, and droughts. Also responsible for vital processes such as nutrient & water transportation and starch synthesis.
Cation Exchange Capacity
Coming back to the Cation Exchange Capacity (CEC), let us look further at why this is important within the soil. The CEC is a measurement for the soil’s negative charge. Better negative charge holds more positively charged ions or cations. A scale from 0 (low) to 50 (high) tells the CEC level, from 0 being poor and 50 being excellent. In other words, the CEC is a parameter of soil representing the capability to retain, hold, and attract exchangeable cations. If the soil is organic, then it will have a higher CEC. 3. A soil test analysis done by Royce Vaughn supplied evidence of the relation between organic matter and CEC levels. In a recent Agger Grand YouTube video, Mr. Vaughn made note of the high cation exchange level of 31.4 due to having organic matter. A different soil analysis with lower organic matter had CEC levels of 13.08.
References
Harvesto Group. (2020, November 17). Importance of nitrogen in soil & plants. https://www.harvestogroup.com/post/importance-of-nitrogen-in-soil-plants
Jacques, K. (2022, April 25). N-P-K ratio: What do the numbers on fertilizer mean? Almanac. https://www.almanac.com/n-p-k-ratio-what-do-numbers-fertilizer-mean
Postma, R. (n.d.). NPK: What is it and why is it so important? Agro Cares. Retrieved November 18, 2022, from https://www.agrocares.com/2020/11/02/npk-what-is-it-and-why-is-it-so-important/
Potash Development Association. (2018, April). Nitrogen & potassium interactions. PDA. https://www.pda.org.uk/nitrogen-potassium-interactions/
Pro-Soil. (2022). Why are nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium important to soil? https://pro-soil.com/why-are-nitrogen-phosphorus-and-potassium-important-to-soil/
Renkeer. (2021, October 16). Knowing soil NPK: Your plants, grow better. https://www.renkeer.com/knowing-soil-npk-for-plants-grow-better/
Soils Alive. (2015, March 10). What’s in my soil? The top 3 macronutrients for healthy plants. https://soilsalive.com/whats-in-my-soil-the-top-3-macronutrients-for-healthy-plants/
 
