“Compost is organic material that can be added to soil to help plants grow. Food scraps and yard waste together currently make up more than 30 percent of what we throw away, and could be composted instead. Making compost keeps these materials out of landfills where they take up space and release methane, a potent greenhouse gas” (EPA, 2022). The end result is “compost” and is carried out on both large and small scale by mushroom farms, municipal compost facilities, and operations of all sizes. Many nutrients that were in the base material end up making it into the finished product, less some nitrogen and carbon that were released back into the atmosphere, whence they came. Hot compost is full of microbes, both living and dead – that’s a good thing. “The microorganisms found in your compost pile, like ants, beetles, centipedes, earthworms, mites, sowbugs, and snails, are physical decomposers…bacteria, fungi, and actinomycetes are responsible for the most organic material breakdown. They are called chemical decomposers since they use chemicals in their bodies to break down organic matter (Go-Compost, 2022). “The most abundant type of chemical decomposer in a compost pile is aerobic bacteria. When they break down organic material, they give off heat. Billions of aerobic bacteria working to decompose the organic matter in a compost pile causes the pile to warm up” (State of California, 2022). Organic matter comes from those living materials in the soil to deliver carbon as a source of energy. There are 3 types of organic matter that include active organic matter, passive organic matter, and slow organic matter. Active contains fresh plant and animal residues that take from a few months to years to decompose fully, then passive organic matter, also called humus, is a stable form of organic matter where decomposition has already been completed and there is no longer any microbiological activity, and finally slow organic matter which falls between active and passive in where slow takes decades to fully decompose, much like bones (Hassani, 2022). Now we know that compost has both microbes, micro-organisms, and nutrients. “By adding carbon (browns) and nitrogen (greens) to organic material, combined with lots of air and water, we create a nutrient rich substance that can be used as natural fertilizer to our soil - sustaining future growth” (Common Ground Compost, 2022). Plants evolved to flourish when nutrients are present. Compost carries a high level of carbon, the same stuff in greenhouse gas, but in the form of organic matter. Organic matter is a very broad category that can include semi-broken down plant material, decaying microbes and small insects, and up to fully-formed humus. There are 3 levels to the compost food web. Level one being primary consumers which are organisms that shred organic matter and microscopic organisms that eat the shredded residues, level two (secondary consumers) comprised of organisms that eat level one organisms, and finally level three (tertiary consumers) comprised of the organisms that eat level two organisms (State of California, 2022). 
Organic material decomposition – “As the temperature rises, different organisms thrive. Psychrophilic bacteria are most active at around 55F. Mesophilic bacteria take over around 70oF up to 100F. When the compost pile temperature goes over 100F, the heat loving thermophilic bacteria take over. Thermophilic bacteria prefer a temperature between 113F and 160oF. If the pile heats to more than 160F, bacteria begin to die off and decomposition slows down. This is why experts recommend turning your pile before the temperature exceeds 160F. As thermophilic bacteria run out of food, the pile will cool and the makeup of the microbial community will shift back towards cooler-temperature bacteria. This is when fungi become more active in the compost pile. Fungi prefer a temperature range between 70F and 75F and do a great job breaking down cellulose and lignin, the woody materials in your pile. The difficult process of breaking down these more complex materials can take many weeks.
Actinomycetes, a fungi-like bacteria Actinomycetes are fungi-like bacteria that are light greyish in color and credited with creating the Earthy aroma of good compost. Along with fungi, Actinomycetes play a critical role in degrading the more complex woody materials in your compost pile, such as lignin, chitin, cellulose and proteins. These bacteria prefer a high pH and generally work in moderate temperatures. In mature compost, Actinomycetes can be seen as long threadlike filaments stretching through the compost. Some say Actinomycetes in compost resembles cobwebs” (State of California, 2022). 
Organic Material Decomposition
Macro-organisms around compost pile such as mites, sow bugs, snails, beetles, and earthworms are the physical decomposers grinding tearing and chewing material into smaller bits, while micro-organisms such as bacteria, fungi, and actinomycetes are responsible for most of the organic material breakdown
Starts with most abundant chemical decomposer called aerobic bacteria that give off heat which causes compost piles to warm up
Psychrophilic bacteria are found at 55 degrees Fahrenheit, mesophilic bacteria around 70-100 degrees Fahrenheit, and 100-160 thermophilic bacteria take over.
Thermophilic bacteria deplete their food and the pile cools and shifts back to cooler-temperature bacteria. Fungi become more active in the cooling phase.
Actinomycetes are the fungi-like bacteria that degrade the more complex woody materials, and look like long threadlike filaments stretching through compost, resembling cobwebs. 