“Nutrient imbalances refer to situations when one or more essential plant nutrients are either deficient or available in excess of what plants take up at a given time. The former situation causes plant stunting and reduced yield and quality, while the latter can lead to loss of nutrients from the soil and environmental degradation. The soil may have nutrients in both excess and deficient at the same time, and some nutrients can compete with others for plant uptake and cause deficiencies even when soil levels are sufficient” (Washington State University, 2022). 
There are 6 things to know about nutrient imbalances:
Many nutrient imbalances share similar symptoms. A good example is nitrogen and sulfur. When plants are deficient in either nutrient, leaves turn yellow.
Multiple imbalances can occur at the same time. Your plants may suffer from multiple deficiencies at the same time, particularly if the incorrect pH or another factor is causing the deficiencies. Your plants might also suffer from toxicity and deficiency at the same time, especially since nutrient toxicities can result in deficiencies of another nutrient. As an example, excess phosphorus often causes zinc deficiencies.
Different plant species respond to deficiencies and toxicities in different ways. Some types are more tolerant of certain imbalances or show different symptoms. For instance, strawberry leaves typically turn red as a result of phosphorus deficiency while corn leaves turn purple.
Some diseases produce similar symptoms to nutrient imbalances but too much or too little water, soil compaction, and insect attack can also mimic nutrient imbalance symptoms. Pesticide (including herbicide) damage can also produce similar symptoms. 
Nutrient imbalances may be silent for some time. That is, a plant may be suffering from a deficiency or toxicity for some time before symptoms become visible.
Symptoms that you see may differ from ‘typical’ symptoms. Scientists can take photos of plants grown under laboratory conditiodns with an intentional deficiency or toxicity. In your garden or on your farm, symptoms may look different for any number of reasons including but not limited to:
Different species
Different soil type
The presence of other nutrient imbalances
Too much or too little water or light (Wade, 2019). 
“Increasing soil organic matter can boost soil fertility and balance the soil nutrient system” (FAO, 2016). 

(Suzy-Farms, 2022). 
pH is critical to soil health (Suzy-Farms, 2022).
 (Suzy-Farms, 2022).

(CultivAce, 2021).